the international court of justice in
the Haag has ordered Israel to stop its
military offensive in the city of Rafa
in southern Gaza the 's top Court
described the humanit humanitarian
situation there as disastrous and
ordered Israel to allow unhindered
access of aid but Israel rejected the
ruling and says its operations against
Hamas a group considered an terrorist
organization by multiple countries will
continue far from the front lines of the
war and Gaza Israel's military campaign
suffered a major legal
blow Israel must immediately hold its
military offensive and any other action
in the RAF Governor which may inflict on
the Palestinian group in Gaza conditions
of life that could bring about its
physical destruction in whole or in part
the latest icj ruling unequivocal about
the need for Israel to protect
Palestinians and do more to provide
vital Aid the unhindered provision at
scale by all concerned of urgently
needed basic services and humanitarian
assistance and of course necess states
that the respondent maintain open land
Crossing points and in particular the ra
crossing the decision welcomed by South
Africa which brought the case and has
accused Israel of committing genocide
this order is groundbreaking as it is
the first time that explicit mention is
made for Israel to Halt its military
action in any area of Gaza this time
specifically in
Rafa Israel rejects accusations of
genocide and the latest icj ruling War
cabinet minister Benny gun said the
fight to return its hostages would
continue including in Rafa the icj also
ordered the unconditional release of
hostages being held by ham
while the court has no way of enforcing
the ruling it poses a major challenge
for Israel's
allies we have to choose between our
support of the international institution
and the rule of law or our support to
Israel and both things is going to be
quite difficult to make competible the
ruling is the second blow to Israel's
war this week the international criminal
court has applied for arrest warrants
for Israel's prime minister and defense
minister over war crimes both judicial
decisions adding to Growing Global
criticism of Israel's
war Mark Weller is Professor of
international law and international
constitutional studies at the University
of Cambridge in the UK he told me more
about the Court's reasoning well Israel
is of course entitled to the right to
self-defense in response to the horrible
atrocious uh events of the 7th of
October but the right to self-defense is
not unlimited and it can never
transgress humanitarian law the law that
surprise that supports the Dignity of
human persons human beings in any
circumstance even in war and the court
has now spoken for the third time in
just a few months which is
unprecedented ordering Israel the first
time
uh not to do anything which could
constitute acts of genocide against the
people of Gaza the Palestinians the
second time it has ordered Israel to
ensure that there is full humanitarian
access and now almost unprecedentedly it
has ordered a state claiming to be in
the middle of a self-defense operation
to Halt a major element of that campaign
it's rough
offensive okay so let's pick up the two
you mentioned there uh two previous
rulings there nothing that constitutes
genocide and full humanitarian access
today's ruling uh required Israel uh to
uh provide verification or to allow
verification uh of humanitarian access
which seems to indicate that the court
does not believe that Israel has
complied with its earlier
ruling well it certainly hasn't complied
uh in the sense that the court has found
that the situation has gotten much worse
and therefore very unusually it has made
yet a further ruling in this case and
the court is very very concerned about
the future of those individuals who were
sent to Rafa as a safe place by Israel
to escape the consequences of the
fighting and who are now being displaced
from there without adequate measures
have been taken to ensure their survival
in other places and the court has
noticed that no such adequate steps have
been taken
okay so there we have a problem don't we
because the court rules uh do something
about humanitarian access the court
rules today uh against uh Israel and
says stop what's going on in Rafa and
let us check that you've complied with
our earlier ruling we heard yesterday
from an Israeli government spokesman who
was quoted as saying no power on Earth
will stop Israel from protecting its
citizens and going after Hamas in Gaza
the court can rule until it's blue in
the face where's it or
else well uh how many Legions does the
pope have as was famously asked the
court doesn't have an army to enforce
its wishes it could have an army if the
UN Security Council were able to
exercise its role because the UN
Security Council has in principle the
power to enforce judgments of the court
but of course with the US veto that is
not possible
and therefore it is the very very
significant diplomatic pressure you saw
the indictments by the international
criminal court in relation to Mr
Netanyahu a completely sear we should
say and those uh have been backed up now
yet again uh in addition to their
individual responsibility by these
actions directed towards the state of
Israel and it really makes the
Diplomatic space for Israel much much
more difficult to maneuver in Israel has
been arguing we have been a model of
humanitarian law compliance but with all
of this evidence those arguments ring
increasingly Hollow as most people who
watch television of course already know
but once you have these authoritative
findings from the highest judicial
bodies in the world it is much more
difficult for Israel to maintain its
position that it is in a modest way
defending itself does this ruling impose
any duties or obligations on any other
signatures uh to the court to do or not
do anything I'm thinking of the United
States amongst others who it could be
argued are are is or are supplying
Israel with the wherewithal to carry out
the activities that the court has now
prohibited B you should say that as of
course you're hinting at Germany is at
present subject to a case in the
international court of justice where
nicaragu has argued that the continued
provision of Arms by Germany to Israel
violates the genocide
convention and for a state like Germany
which Prides itself as a model of
compliance with international law um on
the one hand but which also wants to
remain a very strong friend of Israel
that is a real huge dilemma coming up
for it the United States uh will will
not likely uh consider uh the court in
relation to its arms exports which are
of course quite massive uh the United
Kingdom may be in a different position
because under its ministerial code it
cannot uh
license uh the export of weapons uh if
these weapons are likely to be used
against international law or certainly
in favor of a campaign of genocide so
these various pronouncements again make
the space to maneuver for Israel and for
its allies uh significantly smaller
doesn't end the conflict but it is
another piece in the Mosaic uh which
will help I think persuade Israel
ultimately to try not to isolate itself
entirely from the International
Community and just a final word on
genocide because today's ruling is a
part of a broader uh lawsuit brought by
South Africa last year accusing Israel
of committing genocide in Gaza just
explain to us briefly what impact
today's decision has on that
well this is part of that case it is the
third interim action by the court to
protect the people of Palestine during
the many years it will take the court to
give the actual ruling as to whether or
not genocide has taken place so this
action does not actually Prejudice the
finding of the court at the end of that
lengthy period of legal argument as to
whether or not genocide occurred
remember the Bosnian case were most
thought uh we were faced with a
significant campaign of genocide and
after many years of deliberation the
court found that Sanita was genocide but
the rest of this Dreadful campaign of
crimes against humanity didn't quite
measure up to that high legal standard
that's very clear Professor thank you so
much for walking us through that
Professor Mark Weller from the
University of
Cambridge Mary Ellen oconnell is
Professor of Law and professor of
International Peace studies at the
University of Notre Dame in the United
States one of for numerous books is
self-defense against non-state actors
she joins us from Rio de Janeiro in
Brazil a welcome to DW Professor uh this
ruling sounds pretty unequivocal uh not
a lot of wiggle room for
Israel there is no wiggle room in this
order remember it's the third order
issued by the international court of
justice in this case the two prior
orders have been defied people are still
dying in large numbers
especially civilians especially children
the court like everyone in the world
including President Biden sees this
operation against Rafa as nothing short
of catastrophic the court has ordered a
halt to this operation what else could
it do well Israel has said all along
that it has pursued these actions in the
defense of its citizens following that
bar barbarous attack by Hamas terrorists
why wasn't that enough for the
quot the Israel's argument its attempted
justification has flaws in it on a
number of levels on the first level the
international court itself has ruled in
2004 that a war an allout War under the
UN Charter's um recognition of the right
of self-defense cannot be waged against
a zone of occupation by the occupier of
course Israel can take defensive
measures it can do whatever it wants on
its own territory to defend from
incoming attacks further terrorist
attacks but it cannot launch an allout
War having launched this war in defiance
of the Court's own prior decision it
then has to comply with certain rules
derived from the Geneva conventions
known as inter International
humanitarian law that whatever your
military objective is you have to first
and foremost distinguish between
Fighters and civilians you must only
carry out those operations that are
necessary to accomplish the military
objective not cause disproportionate
loss of civilian life and at all times
remember Humanity the humanity of the
victims of armed conflict and the
fighters own the Israeli soldiers own
humanity and the court has had evidence
brought by South Africa that Israel is
not complying with either its prior
ruling in the wall case or these
fundamental principles of international
humanitarian law not allowing food in
sufficiently the large the very high
number of deaths which are not dis when
you drop a bomb on an apartment building
in the hope of getting one potential
fighter this is the very definition of
disproportionate the court has said time
and again yes Israel can take defensive
measures it must respond and protect its
own citizens as every country does
against terrorism Okay police measures
appropriate to the
challenge does not
see the the court has ruled repeatedly
uh about Israel's conduct I think you
said this was the third ruling and one
of today's rulings was that Israel must
allow investigators to establish whether
it has complied with a previous ruling
so where is the all else the court can
rule till it it's blue in the face if
Israel just sits there and says I don't
care well one of the clear consequences
of Israel not complying with the prior
to orders it didn't comply with the
first order in January so then the
second order came in March it didn't
comply with the second order the third
order has come and this order as you
pointed out is really definitive is as
as clear and as black and white as any
order the international court has ever
issued it means not only that Israel
must comply but every state in the
International Community whose law we're
talking about the law of the
International Community has to assist
the court
has to assist South Africa and in
bringing enforcement we all know that
the country most in a position to really
help enforce this most recent order is
the United States President Biden
himself has warned Israel about this
Rafa offensive he has the he's the last
country that's providing really
extensive weapons offensive weapons to
Israel President Biden is the person I
want to listen to this order and say
okay we must halt delivery of offensive
weapons to Israel Israel has to know
it's alone in believing that what it's
doing complies with the law because it
does not and following on from that does
this ruling o open up the possibility of
international sanctions against
Israel I possibly but I think sanctions
are beside the point at this moment what
really needs to happen is for the
Israeli government to listen to its own
people to listen to people around the
world saying we do not want this kind of
Carnage in our name this kind of a
failure to comply with the law we do not
want to be law Breakers we want to be
those who uphold the rule of law that
sanctions are not necessarily A a great
option it is a sanction of course for
the US to withhold weapons lots of
countries now have changed fundamentally
their position Visa Israel because of
failure to comply with international law
either as as exemplified or as as
explained by the court or as their own
legal advisers have seen this I at this
point we've seen sanctions not doing as
much as they should do to persuade
Russia I I don't think sanctions Beyond
withholding weapons are really going to
be the the the thing that moves Israel
now okay but whatever it takes I'm happy
to hear governments stepping up let's
talk about two things today's uh Court
ruling hasn't ordered number one uh a
ceasefire and number two uh any ruling
on whether or not uh Israel has
committed
genocide it it cannot then the second
point it cannot rule on that point
definitively yet these are emergency
orders that the court has been ruling
these three sets of orders are emergency
orders provisional measures pending the
outcome of a full case on the merits so
until that happens Israel the court
cannot uh rule definitively on whether
genocide is occurring or has occurred by
the time it rules on the merits as the
court said after its first uh set of
orders in January there are there's
plausible indications of genocide but it
is in no position and it would be a
Defiance of its own rules to make a
definitive uh finding on that point
right now so that's the first one please
remind me of your second the ceasefire
so no talk in this ruling of a ceasefire
in the whole of this
conflict the remember the first two
orders are more comprehensive they apply
throughout Gaza and they say that Israel
has to take all these measures to
prevent genocide that's that's as much
as the is unfortunately from my point of
view it's not a case about peace and
compliance with the prohibition on the
use of force it's a case
about uh the genocide convention so the
court in before it's made its full uh
findings in the in the case in a
preliminary way is trying to ensure that
the genocide convention is not violated
so it's pointing out to Israel that it's
got to take more measures to ensure that
that what Israel is doing is not uh uh
eliminating the Palestinian people in
whole or in part and that's a different
um goal than perhaps if it had a more
General basis for ruling on violations
by Israel in Gaza so it's limited in
terms of the treaty under which the case
is brought thank you so much for talking
us through that professor professor Mary
Ellen oconnell from Notre Dame
university in the United States thank
you thank you let's take a look then at
potential Israeli and American reactions
to this ruling the Atlantic council is
an American think tank in the field of
International Affairs and Alysa Pavia is
associate director middle Easter
programs she joins us from Washington DC
welcome to DW can we start with your
thoughts on this latest ruling against
Israel of course and and thank you for
having me um so this late latest ruling
against Israel comes in the wake of a
week uh week long um a week where we've
seen a number of other instances occur
in the International Community that have
been quite outspoken against Israel and
so the first one was the ICC arrest
warrants that were made at the beginning
of the week um against uh both Israeli
and Hamas leaders and on the Israel side
those were um against uh Benjamin nany
and you have Galan the Prime Minister
and the minister of defense and
subsequent to that we also saw number of
European Union countries that have come
out um in defense of Palestine by
backing and by by um by backing the
creation of Palestinian State and these
are Ireland Norway and Spain and so this
much we we we've covered you you like
your your thoughts time is short
obviously I'd like your thoughts on
today's uh
ruling of course so on on today's ruling
um this obviously is is um a ruling by
the by the icj that that um is trying to
pressure Israel into not going into
rafine they want and the icj is eager to
see a more International uh more
International pressure onto Israel um
and of course as your as the as as the
person before me covered this will um
likely hinge on whether the United
States will want to support or not um
the icj's ruling because the icj um on
its own doesn't have um much of an
enforcement mechanism onto these onto
this ruling but the way it can enforce
it is through a United uh United n
security coun United Nations security
Council um resolution but for that to
happen the United States needs to needs
to be in favor of that and can't veto
that a deafening silence so far from the
White House why do you think that
is deafening silence they are deciding
on the next steps um the United States
has had somewhat of an ambiguous um role
or an ambiguous uh uh way of of of
deciding on on these latest instances
when it comes to Israel um we've seen a
two-tier approach when it comes to
President Biden specifically where in
public um in some instances he's been
more vocal and critical of Israel but in
other instances but he's mostly in
practice supported um Israel's war in AA
and so as of now and also as of now that
we've heard of Benjamin netan um
agreeing to speak uh at Congress again
in defiance of of of prime minister of
uh President Biden um this way this may
bring to a greater wedge between the
relationship between netan and Biden
that may um uh that that may have an
effect on the way President Biden
decides to um tackle this latest ruling
okay so this this wedge being driven
between the the leaders of the United
States and Israel except that um when we
had the announcement from the uh
international criminal court uh
prosecutor this week there was virtually
no Delay from the United States in
condemning this
move that is correct there is no delay
again um the sense is that because
Benjamin nany is is going to defy uh
President Biden in Congress and speak in
front of Congress this may be uh the
moment for President Biden to strike
back um against prime minister Netanyahu
but um it is also likely that he may not
do that because up until now um he has
been forceful in his um backing and
supporting Israel through um providing
military and uh fincial support by um
vetoing un Council resolutions so the
sense is that he is um waiting to kind
of provide more pressure onto Biden but
at the end he will again oppose the icj
ruling is there an argument that Benin
netanyahu's government has actually gone
too far to row back now having declared
their intention to destroy Hamas and
rescue the hostages must they now keep
going the argument on Israel's side is
that um Rafa is the last goalpost where
Hamas is hiding and if they don't
continue now um they will not be able
to win essentially the war that they
started in October um President Biden
has said repeatedly that to an extent he
he agrees but he also disagrees with
with it in the sense of U wanting to see
more wanting to see Israel be more
cognizant of civilan casualties but at
the same
time yeah we're going to leave it there
thank you so much for for joining us
andisa Pavia from Atlantic Council thank
you so much thank you so much well from
Ontario Canada let's now bring in
Michael link professor of Law and also a
former un special rapor on human rights
in the Palestinian territories thank you
so much for taking the time to talk to
us again here on DW Professor link how
much of a blow is this ruling for
Israel well it's another blow in another
remarkable week with respect to
international law as your commentator
mentioned um uh the arrest warrants
application that was announced on Monday
by the prosecutor uh was certainly uh U
devaluing um Israel's reputation in the
International Community uh the remarks
by three European countries on Wednesday
to recognize Palestine as a state was a
further diplomatic blow and today with
the international court of justice
ruling on the further application by
South Africa uh concluded that Israel
must immediately halt its military
offensive in uh in Rafa and it must
maintain the Rafa Crossing which Israel
controls from the Palestinian side it
must maintain that open in order to
allow uh the unhindered flow of
humanitarian Aid which is probably at
the very worst stage
that it's been in the S and half months
of this of this awful War so you know
it's hard to imagine uh how much lower
Israel's International reputation uh can
go uh and if it if it proceeds as it
appears it will uh with its full-blown
Rafa offensive I suspect we'll see more
condemnation of Israel in the days and
weeks to
come yeah and talking about other
countries let's go a bit deeper there
because the court doesn't really have
the ability to force Israel to comply
but does this ruling oppose any duties
or obligations on other countries to do
or not do anything countries like the US
and Germany for example which are
supplying Israel with
weapons sure I mean I not it doesn't uh
affect them directly but certainly there
could be domestic um litigation in both
countries because they are by far uh the
largest arm suppliers to Israel as you
mentioned uh to try to uh go to the
courts in each country uh to say that
there is complicity uh in uh in
Germany's actions uh in a an offensive
that uh both both the world Court uh has
wound up condemning and has been
condemned at the general assembly of the
United Nations as well um so this may
well up opening up domestic challenges
uh that will build upon what the court
has said yeah I'll definitely be
interesting to see how that pans out but
this ruling is just one part of a
broader complaint that South Africa
filed late last year accusing Israel of
committing genocide in Gaza what impact
does today's decision have on
that well it probably continues to
harden the court uh with respect to
Israel's conduct if you had a visual
view of what the uh what the audience in
the court looked like today there were
three lawyers representing Israel and
the rest of the seats where ordinarily a
very large Israeli delegation would be
seated were entirely empty uh I'm not
I'm not sure that was meant as contempt
by Israel for uh for the court um or
that was meant as a resignation knowing
what the Court's ruling was uh was
likely uh going to uh going to
be so this is all um fairly objective so
far but Professor I'd like to ask you
what your opinion is what do you think
this ruling will actually
accomplish well in the short run it it
won't accomplish anything Israel has U
shown disdain for the three prior r ings
that the international court has um has
issued with respect to the South African
application and remember the South
African application for charges of
genocide against Israel won't be heard
uh in full by the court for probably
several years uh down the road if we're
measuring um by the same yard stick um
the proceedings against myamar brought
by The Gambia uh at the international
court of justice um but it will continue
I think to deeply stain uh Israel's
diplom atic and political standing in
the world I think we've already seen
obviously on campuses in Europe and
particularly in North America the kind
of Uprising um that are calling upon
their universities to stop uh academic
relationships and investments in uh
Israel all of this I think will continue
um there's no sign of a a ceasefire
being reached in Gaza I suspect uh even
if Israel was to win all of its War
gains and and decapitate Hamas
politically and militarily that will
take a large number of months yet so I
suspect this kind of protests these
kinds of legal actions this kind of
political censor against Israel will
continue through the
summer well Professor Michael link thank
you so much for your expertise and your
analysis there thanks for being with us
here on DW again thank you very much H
for having me